{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2758
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0     "Okay I will."\
    Japhy, kneeling there studying his star map, leaning forward slightly to peek up through\
the overhanging gnarled old rock country trees, with his goatee and all, looked, with that\
mighty graw-faced rock behind him, like, exactly like the vision I had of the old Zen Masters\
of China out in the wilderness. He was leaning forward on his knees, upward looking, as if\
with a holy sutra in his hands. Pretty soon he went to the snowbank and brought back the\
chocolate pudding which was now ice cold and absolutely delicious beyond words. We ate it\
all up. "Maybe we oughta leave some for Morley." "Ah it won't keep, it'll melt in the morning\
sun." As the fire stopped roaring and just got to be red coals, but big ones six feet long, the\
night interposed its icy crystal feel 1 more and more but with the smell of smoking logs it was\
as delicious as chocolate pudding. For a while I went on a little walk by myself, out by the\
shallow iced creek, and sat meditating against a stump of dirt and the huge mountain walls on\
both sides of our valley were silent masses. Too cold to do this more than a minute. As I came\
back our orange fire casting its glow on the big rock, and Japhy kneeling and peering up at the\
sky, and all of it ten thousand feet above the gnashing world, was a picture of peace and good\
sense. There was another aspect of Japhy that amazed me: his tremendous and tender sense of\
charity. He was always giving things, always practicing what the Buddhists call the Paramita\
of Dana, the perfection of charity.\
    Now when I came back and sat down by the fire he said "Well Smith it's about time you\
owned a set of juju beads you can have these," and he handed me the brown wood beads run\
together over a strong string with the string, black and shiny, coming out at the large bead at\
the end in a pretty loop.\
    "Aw you can't give me something like this, these things come from Japan don't they?"\
    "I've got another set of black ones. Smith that prayer you gave me tonight is worth that set\
of juju beads, but you can have it anyway." A few minutes later he cleaned out the rest of the\
chocolate pudding but made sure that I got most of it. Then when he laid boughs over the rock\
of our clearing and the poncho over that he made sure his sleeping bag was farther away from\
the fire than mine so I would sure to be warm. He was always practicing charity. In fact he\
taught me, and a week later I was giving him nice new undershirts I'd discovered in the\
Goodwill store. He'd turn right around and make me a gift of a plastic container to keep food\
in. For a joke I'd give him a gift of a huge flower from Alvah's yard. Solemnly a day later he'd\
bring me a little bouquet of flowers picked in the street plots of Berkeley. "And you can keep\
the sneakers too," he said. "I've got another pair older than those but just as good."\
    "Aw I can't be taking all your things."\
    "Smith you don't realize it's a privilege to practice giving presents to others." The way he\
did it was charming; there was nothing glittery and Christmasy about it, but almost sad, and\
sometimes his gifts were old beat-up things but they had the charm of usefulness and sadness\
of his giving.}